---
navigation: false
head:
    title: Freedom of, or from, religion
---
# Freedom of, or from, religion
#### Originally published on: Nov 29, 2023

European courts have, once again, confirmed their stance on one of the hottest topics of the last decade: freedom of religious expression in the workplace. As it has often been the case, the court debated a public service employee's right to wear the hijab, but the discussion goes further than the Islamic headscarf and its place in a municipality's dress code. Or, does it? Is this one more win for Islamophobes in a Europe that is growing more and more divided, or is it a valid, and more extensive, philosophical conundrum?

To answer this question, we must take a hard look at both sides of the discussion, and assess whether each standpoint holds water from a philosophical and political point of view.

People arguing for religious freedom often center their point around Liberalism, a school of thought according to which one should be free to pursue whatever they consider good and true. Going back as far as Marcus Aurelius, we can find the idea that the government should respect "The freedoms of the governed," and as such, freedom of speech and of expression become essential values of a liberal society.

In the western societies where this debate takes place, agreement with this philosophical current is nearly unanimous, but secularism is where things get interesting. The separation of Church and State is a principle with such a broad range of interpretations that two people believing in the same core idea can, and do, reach conclusions that stand entirely at odds with each other.

Case in point, a defender of religious symbols in public spaces would argue that the state should treat all convictions equally, as some countries such as Germany and the Benelux states do. Although most recent headlines show that Belgium is trending towards a French-inspired model of policies, and that the Netherlands has seen a large increase in negative sentiment towards Muslims, these countries can generally be considered as “positively neutral” towards religion. Some unique or special treatment is granted to religious entities in ways of funding or state sympathy, but not in a way that shows any favoritism or hostility towards a specific religion or philosophical conviction.

On the other hand, those defending an employer’s right to enforce religious neutrality would say that it is in the interest of secularism; if the French "Laïque" model is chosen as a reference point. In such a system, the state is firmly distanced from all sorts of religious organization, and as such, public servants are expected to not display any symbol of belonging to an in-group that is not the country itself. If this model can seem oppressive or strict, it is worth remembering that the French Constitution has freedom of religion embedded into its first article, and that defendants of *laïcité* argue that it doesn’t imply any hostility towards religion, just absolute neutrality and detachment from religious institutions.

Another key concept of this debate, taken straight from the French model, is the idea that religion should never be a public affair, belonging instead to the private sphere. While the actual application of this principle has been ebbing and flowing, following broader political undercurrents, it is undeniable that this approach is opposite to that of a country like the United States, where religious affiliations pack quite a punch in political discussions. Currently, the relegation of religion to the privacy of one’s home or place of worship has become a hot topic because of its skewed impact on the non-Christian immigrant population of France, most of all amongst Muslims. It is still arguable whether the ban of religious attire from schools and public places will result in improved integration, or in a wider spread of feelings of marginalization.

Finally, it’s worth taking into consideration whether this debate could be rooted in a bad faith argument, disguised as run-of-the-mill identity politics. American reactions to the latest European case against religious garments were quick to question whether this legal decision was rooted in some sort of institutional racism, or whether it would be enforced as evenly as the court mandated. Some would go as far as consider this a case of forced assimilation, an attempt to “free” Muslim women from an oppressive or outdated religion. While it is a fact that this legislation would disproportionately affect hijab-wearers, that being the most visible symbol of a mainstream, but not majority religion, the law’s main goal still seems to be the preservation of religious neutrality in the workplace, and not some wider attempt to oppress a minority.

Wrapping up this deep dive into Europe's struggle with religious expression in the workplace, it's clear that we're not just talking about dress codes. This is a battle of ideologies, where secularism and religious liberty are, as always, at odds. What's evident is that these policies, while aimed at preserving secular spaces, don't land equally across all communities. The Muslim population, in particular, finds itself in the crosshairs, raising questions about inclusivity and respect for diversity. The intent might be to maintain neutrality in public spaces, but the impact can often feel like a push towards conformity, stirring debates on whether this is integration or forced assimilation.

In the end, these discussions are a mirror to western Europe's broader identity crisis. How it balances its secular ideals with its simmering religious melting pot will be a true test of its commitment to both unity and diversity. As Europe writes its next chapter, the world watches to see if it can find that delicate balance where freedom of religion and secularism can coexist, not just in the halls of justice but in the everyday lives of its population.